Recently, LLMs have demonstrated impressive zero-shot capabilities in diverse code-related tasks
including code generation and code summarization [Achiam et al. 2023; Guo et al. 2024; Luo
et al. 2023; Nijkamp et al. 2022; Roziere et al. 2023]. Code generation refers to generating a code
for a given natural language description. In recent years, LLMs designed for coding tasks, such
as CodeGen [Nijkamp et al. 2022], Code Llama [Roziere et al. 2023] and DeepSeek-Coder [Guo
et al. 2024], have achieved remarkable results in code generation. Code summarization refers to
generating a summary in natural language for a given code. Many works [Geng et al. 2024; Sun
et al. 2023] have demonstrated the effectiveness of LLMs in code summarization.
In this work, we directly utilize LLMs’ zero-shot capabilities to generate code and comments for
cross-domain code search. The methods mentioned above can potentially be used in our approach.
3 Empirical Study Setup
We conduct an empirical study to investigate the feasibility of leveraging query-comment matching
and code-code matching to mitigate domain gaps. In this section, we will introduce the experimental
setup of our empirical study.
3.1 Dataset
This work focuses on cross-domain code search scenarios. Thus, we use the Solidity dataset [Chai
et al. 2022], which is commonly employed as a benchmark for the cross-domain code search
task [Chai et al. 2022; Fan et al. 2024]. Solidity is a language designed for smart contracts [Wohrer
and Zdun 2018] and is not included in the pre-trained data of the PLMs we use. We follow the data
split of prior work [Chai et al. 2022], where the training, validation, and test sets consist of 56,976,
4,096, and 1,000 samples, respectively. We exclusively use the test set from the Solidity dataset,
which consists of 1,000 test queries and their corresponding 1,000 Solidity functions.
3.2 Research Questions
Our study is structured around the following research questions (RQs):
RQ1: How effective is query-comment matching compared to query-code matching?
Our objective is to investigate the effectiveness of query-comment matching and the relationship
between query-comment matching and query-code matching. To answer RQ1, we first compare the
performance of query-comment matching with query-code matching. For the query-code matching
schema, we calculate the similarity between the query and the code and then order the code based
on the similarity scores. For the query-comment matching schema, since the original comments of
code are used as queries, we first use zero-shot prompting to guide LLMs in generating a comment
for each code. Then we order the code based on similarity scores between the query and comments
related to the code. We then identify the differences between the retrieval results obtained from
these two search methods to determine if they complement each other. Finally, we analyze the
specific scenarios in which the query-comment matching method performs better.
RQ2: How effective is code-code matching compared to query-code matching? Similar to
RQ1, we first compare the performance of code-code matching with query-code matching. For the
query-code matching schema, the retrieval process is identical to that described in RQ1. For the
code-code matching schema, because there are no code snippets labeled as matching the test queries
in either the training set or validation set, we also leverage LLMs to generate a code snippet for
each query. During the retrieval process, we rank the code based on the similarity scores between
the code and the generated code. We then also analyze the differences between the retrieval results
from the two search methods and the specific scenarios where code-code matching performs better.
RQ3: Can the three matching schemas complement each other? Considering the comple-
mentarity between the query-code and query-comment schemas, as well as between the query-code
and code-code schemas, we would like to investigate whether these three schemas can complement
each another, and how their relationships can be leveraged for zero-shot code search. To address
this RQ, We further analyze the retrieval results from the three matching schemas and the outcome
of integrating these three schemas.
3.3 Evaluation Metrics
We follow previous studies [Chai et al. 2022; Cheng and Kuang 2022; Fan et al. 2024] and utilize two
widely adopted metrics, MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank) and top-𝑘 accuracy (𝑘= 1, 5, 10), to evaluate
the performance of code search approaches. MRR is the average of the reciprocal ranks of correct
answers for a set of queries. Top-𝑘 accuracy is the proportion of queries for which relevant code
can be found among the top 𝑘 results.
3.4 Implementation Details
As UniXcoder [Guo et al. 2022] has achieved remarkable results and is widely used as a backbone
model in code search [Shi et al. 2023a; Wang et al. 2023a,b], we utilize UniXcoder as the retriever to
perform zero-shot code search. Following previous studies [Fan et al. 2024; Feng et al. 2020; Wang
et al. 2023c], we set the maximum sequence length of the retriever’s input to 256 for programming
language (PL) and 128 for natural language (NL), respectively. Considering both effectiveness and
efficiency, we utilize DeepSeek-Coder-1.3B-Instruct for zero-shot code and comment generation due
to its impressive performance and the relatively small number of parameters. We set the maximum
generation length of the LLM to 256 for PL and 128 for NL.