3.1 Methodology
3.1.1 Bug Reports Preparation. Our empirical study was conducted on 380 real-world mobile
app bug reports. To ensure the representativeness of this dataset, we followed the data collection
practice used by existing research works on mobile app bug report studies [34, 46, 69] and standard
statistical sampling methods [18]. Specifically, we chose GitHub [23] as the source of mobile bug
reports due to its popularity in hosting mobile apps and tracking issues. Since our approach focuses
on analyzing bug reports for mobile apps, we selected repositories hosting apps available on
FDroid [22], a popular open-source mobile app store, resulting in 3,342 repositories. We then mined
issues from these GitHub repositories between November 8, 2018, and November 8, 2023. To ensure
our dataset contained only bug reports, we only retained issues labeled as "bug", excluding feature
requests and other non-bug-related issues. This resulted in an initial set of 43,390 reports from 755
repositories. The minimum, median, mean, and maximum number of issues from a single repository
was 1, 6, 57, and 3,646. Next, to specifically focus on mobile apps, we filtered out reports containing
the keywords "windows," "linux," or "tv" (in a case-insensitive manner) since some repositories host
apps for multiple platforms. This filtering reduced our dataset to 39,819 issues. To make the dataset
manageable for human review while ensuring statistical validity, we sampled 380 bug reports from
the dataset, achieving a 95% confidence level with a 5% margin of error [18]. During the sampling,
to prevent overrepresentation of any single app, we limited each repository to at most ten sampled
reports following an existing practice [46, 69]. This resulted in a final dataset of 380 bug reports
from 157 different mobile apps.
3.1.2 Coding Process. To answer the RQs, two authors conducted a qualitative coding process on
the bug reports in the dataset. The authors followed the practice of both deductive and inductive
coding [37] to code the BB descriptions systematically. Deductive coding describes an analysis with
predefined codes based on past studies or experiences, while inductive coding derives the codes
from the data. In our study, combining these two approaches helped accelerate the coding process
by reusing codes from prior studies and discovering new findings by defining new codes. For RQ1,
we collected common types of mobile app bugs studied by researchers. Specifically, they include: (1)
UI Display Bugs: Issues that affect UI display [56]; (2) Function bugs: Problems that prevent certain
functions of the app from working properly [71]; (3) Performance bugs: Bugs that slow down
the app’s responsiveness or lead to increased energy or memory consumption [53]; (4) Security
bugs: Vulnerabilities that threaten the security of user information [52]; and (5) Crash bugs: Bugs
that cause the app to crash unexpectedly [45]. For RQ2, we adopted the information modalities
concluded by a study on mobile bug report reproductions [46] as the initial codes: Natural Language,
Image, and Video. For RQ 3 and 4, we did not have initial codes since, to the best of our knowledge,
no existing work answered these questions. Therefore, we identified and defined their codes during
the coding process as introduced below.
The coding process for each RQ was conducted in an iterative manner. Specifically, at each round,
each coder independently analyzed 50 bug reports and labeled each BB description in the report
using either one of the existing codes or a new code if none of the existing codes fit. After each
round of independent coding, the two authors met and discussed their coding results. This meeting
aimed to resolve the conflicts in their coding and discuss the new codes. When the two authors
could not agree, a third author was involved to resolve the disagreement. After the discussion, the
codebook was updated with the new codes and used in the following coding round. The iterative
coding and discussion process continued for four rounds. After the fourth round, no new codes
were generated during the independent coding process. Then, the two coders used the codebook
to code the rest of the bug reports. In the end, two coders merged their codings and resolved any
conflicts by discussion.
We measured the Inter-Coder Agreement (ICA) on the independent codings to evaluate the
reliability of the coding results. The Krippendorff’s alpha (𝛼) [48] coefficient was used for this
evaluation. Our analysis revealed high ICA on the overall codings (𝛼 = 81%, i.e., Substantial
Agreement [64]). Specifically, the coders agreed on codings for RQ1 to RQ4 with corresponding 𝛼
to be 91%, 94%, 92%, and 78%.
3.2 Empirical Study Findings
3.2.1 RQ1: Types of Mobile App Bugs. Among the 380 reports, we identified 71 Crash bug reports
(18.7%); 159 Function bug reports (41.8%); 11 Performance bug reports (3%); 65 UI Display bug
reports (17%); and 1 Security bug report (0.3%). The remaining 73 (19%) reports were found not to
be bug reports for mobile apps. This finding showed that the bug reports selected in our dataset
include various types of bugs for mobile apps. Please note that reports identified not as a bug
report for a mobile app were excluded from the coding process in RQ2-4. However, they were
included in the total count of bug reports for the statistics presented in these RQs.
3.2.2 RQ2: Modality of BB Description. Our study identified three information modalities for
describing BBs: natural language, videos, and screenshots, with natural language being the most
commonly used. Specifically, our study found that 298 reports (78%) used natural language when
describing the BB, 72 reports (20%) used images, and 18 reports (5%) used videos. Note that the
sum of these percentages is larger than 100% since a bug report may have several BB descriptions.
Among the reports with natural language BB descriptions, 70% of bug reports described BB only
in natural language, and 30% of reports provided videos or screenshots as additional information.
Only one report provided only screenshots or videos when describing the BB.
3.2.3 RQ3: Location of BB Description. Our study showed that BB was described in various locations
in a bug report. Specifically, we found that 290 bug reports (76%) provided the BB description in
the report body, 119 reports (31%) described BB in the title, and 21 reports (5%) described the BB in
the comments of the report. Again, the sum of these percentages is larger than 100% since a bug
report may have several BB descriptions. For the 290 reports documenting the BB in the report
body, we found that 183 (63%) report bodies followed a structured template, while 107 (37%) were
free-form text. Generally, the report template specified a section for documenting the BB. However,
we observed that in many cases, reporters did not strictly follow the template and mixed the BB
description with other information. For example, we found that 20% of the reports described the
BB in the “Reproduction Step” section instead of the “Buggy Behavior” section.
3.2.4 RQ4: Manifestation of BB. Our study found that although the bug reports described different
types of bugs (as categorized in RQ1), their manifestation on the mobile device shared common
characteristics. In total, we found four common manifestations (Ms), and each of them was further
divided into sub-categories.
M1. Cause App Crash (16%≈62/380) Bug reports in this category described the BB as causing a
crash on the mobile app. Generally, such a bug triggered the default crash handler in the OS system,
which displayed a dialog window on the UI saying “xx has stopped” [21].
M2. Affect UI Widget Status (40%≈153/380) Bug reports in this category described the BB as
affecting the display of UI widgets. We further divided this category into Display Abnormal Widget
and Conceal Widget.
(1) Display Abnormal Widget (114/153): This manifestation describes a case where the bug caused
a UI widget with certain abnormal characteristics to display on the UI. We found reporters described
the displayed widget in the bug reports from three aspects:
Text Label (82/114): The most common way reporters described the widget was by using
the text label that appeared on the UI widget. Under this category, we observed that 63%
(52/82) of the reports directly mentioned the exact text shown on the UI widget. For example,
in report nextcloud-android-7602 [14], the reporter described an error message widget by
saying, “I always retrieve the same error message The built-in media player can not play
the file.” For the other 37% (30/82) reports, we observed that reporters provided a natural
language description of the label, which did not exactly match the label text. An example
of such cases is report AnySoftKeyboard-2825 [13]. The reporter described the abnormal
display of characters on a widget by saying, “All letters are lowercase.”
•Icon (28/114): Reporters also described the affected widget by its icon. Among bug reports
containing such descriptions, we found that most icon descriptions (11/28) were related to
the widget type. For example, in report msoultanidis-quillnote-46, the reporter mentioned
“the preview was empty, except for a single checkbox.” The reporter directly used the widget
type, “checkbox” [20], to describe it. Besides the widget type, we found six reports describing
the icon based on its function, such as the “uninstall button”; eight reports describing the
color of the icon; and three reports describing the size of the icon.
•Status (8/114): In eight bug reports, reporters described the status of the displayed widget in
the BB description. Specifically, the status refers to whether a button is clickable or whether
a checkbox or radio button is checked. For example, in report unstoppable-wallet-android-
3763 [29], the developer described a bug that caused a widget to become unclickable by
saying, “The enabled passphrase is changed to disabled.”.
(2) Conceal Widget (32/153): In addition to displaying a UI widget, reporters also described the
effect on a widget as the UI widget disappearing. For example, in report nextcloud-android-8905 [15],
reporters described the buggy behavior that caused a disappeared widget by saying, “No media
controls to be found”.
M3. Cause Abnormal Relation between Two UI States 
(13%≈50/380) Bug reports in this
category described the BB as causing unusual relationships between two UI states. Among such bug
reports, we found two common relationships: Identical Screens (20/50) and In-screen Widget Changes
(18/50). The first relation, Identical Screens, describes two given UI states that are the same. For
instance, in report streetcomplete-2410, the reporter mentioned “Nothing happens”. This implies
that the UI remained the same before and after the last reproduction step. The second relationship,
In-screen Widget Changes, describes the changes or persistence of widgets on two given UI states.
In 12 reports, reporters mentioned certain widgets stay on the UI after a UI action. An example of
such a case is deltachat-android-725[7], where the reporter mentioned, “The notification stays”. In
six reports, reporters noted that the widget disappeared from the UI after a UI action. For example,
in report jellyfin-android-459 [12], the reporter mentioned that “The controls disappear”. Note that,
this manifestation describes a change involving two UI screens, and is different from the “Conceal
Widget” in M2, which describes the absence of a widget in a single UI screen. We also observed
other less common UI states relationships. For example, in two bug reports, the reporter described
a brightness change between two UI states.
M4. Affect Mobile Device Status (17%≈65/380) The reports in this category described the BBs
as effects on the mobile device status. In most of the reports in this category (90%), the effect caused
certain messages to be generated in the device log. Such reports were mostly crash bug reports, as
classified in RQ1. However, we also observed some non-crash bugs with such BB descriptions. For
example, in report openhab-android-2583 [26], the reporter provided the device log information
for a UI display bug. In addition to the device log, we observed bug reports describing effects
on the mobile device’s audio (6%), volume (2%), and keyboard status (2%). For example, in report
flex3r-DankChat-66 [25], the bug caused the keyboard to keep displaying even after another button
was clicked.
Unclear Manifestation Logic (10%≈38/380) We were not able to classify the BB manifestation
of bug reports in this category due to insufficient BB descriptions. Specifically, bug reports in this
category usually described the bugs by directly saying “xxx doesn’t work” or “unable to do xxx”
(e.g., report Shabinder-SpotiFlyer-764 [27]). Without knowing further details of the app logic and
the bug information, we could not analyze and classify the BB for these reports.
Manifestation Co-occurrence Analysis Based on the manifestations concluded above, we analyzed
the co-occurrence between different manifestations within the same bug report. We found that 16%
(59 out of 380) of bug reports provided more than one manifestation of the bug. Among them, 58
bug reports described two manifestations, and one bug report described three manifestations. The
three most common combinations of the manifestations that we found in the dataset were (1) M1
and M4, (2) M2 and M4, and (3) M2 and M3.